Chapter 2

2.1

The Lateral Line System

The main motivation for the work is the anatomy of the lateral-line (LL) system of
fishes and the assumption of a similarity between the way the LL and the pit organ
in snakes process information.
Simply put, the LL is a sensory system found in aquatic vertebrates such as adult
fish, larval amphibians, and some adult amphibians used to detect movement, vibration, and pressure gradients in the surrounding water[5]. The system provides fish
with spatial perception without using vision and the ability to better navigate in
their environment, helping them to survive in the challenging environment of oceans,
seas, and rivers. In other words, through the lateral line fish feel their aquatic world.
It appears as a faint line of pores throughout the length of the body of fishes and
tadpoles and passes through the vicinity of the gill covers till the base of the tail as
seen in Figure 2.1 (A) [5].
The building blocks of LL are specialized sensory cells called neuromasts and can
be distributed across almost the entire fish body. They consist of up to several
thousand neuromasts distributed over the entire surface of the fish body. To better
understand the functional significance of the LL it is essential to know the physical
properties of the system itself, the anatomical organisation and most important the
neurophysiological principles. The most outstanding characteristic of the LL is the
separation into a population of superficial neuromasts and a population of canal
neuromasts.
• Superficial neuromasts (SN): Placed directly on the surface of the skin,
where they are arranged in lines or clusters on the head, trunk and tail fin.
They play the role of velocity detectors with the result that neuronal responses
are proportional to the velocity of the water flowing around the cupula [6].
3

• Canal neuromasts (CN): Placed in canals on the fish heads and trunk and
the fluid inside the canals contacts the water surrounding the fish through a
series of canal pores. Their main function is to detect pressure gradient and
respond to pressure differences between neighbouring canal pores. Outside the
canal, the pressure gradient is proportional to the acceleration of the water.
Thus, CNs may also be regarded as acceleration detectors of water motions
outside the canal.

Figure 2.1: Lateral line system of a fish. (A) Bodily location of lateral lines. (B)
Longitudinal section of a canal. (C) Superficial neuromast [13].
The neuromasts consists of a macula comprising sensory hair cells, supporting cells
and mantle cells. The ciliary bundles of the hair cells are embedded in a gelatinous
dome-like structure, the cupula as seen in Figure 2.1 (C). The hair cellls, have a
protruding bundle of short stereocilia arranged in astair-case design and a single
kinocilium adjacent to the tallest stereocilium as seen in Figure 2.2. The stereocilia
and kinocilium form synaptic connections with the nervous tissue at the base and
project into a potassium ion rich endolymph. The stereocilia are connected together
by filamentous tip links joining the tip of a lower stereocilia to the side of the
adjacent higher one. These connection points are locations of ion channels that
allows potassium ions of enter the endolymph [13].
When a fish encounters flow relative to it’s surface the surrounding cupula encounters a drag force proportional to the flow velocity and thus deflects in one direction.
4

Figure 2.2: Depolarization of hair cell due to
flow-coupled deflection of
stereocilia [6]
.

Figure 2.3: Superficial and Canal Neuromasts of
the Lateral Line [13].

This stimulus displaces the stereocilia towards the kinocilium and elongates the tip
link. It opens the gate of the ion channel and admitts potassium ions that depolarises the cell. When stereocilia are displaced in the opposite sense, the tension
in the tip link is reduced and the mechanical ion gate is shut, repolarising the cell.
In other words, water movements cause deflections of the cupula resulting in the
shearing of the ciliary bundles, which leads to a change in the hair cells membrane
potential [6].
The anatomy of the LL system varies greatly across different species. For example,
SNs can appear on the skin or recessed in pits with various number and size among
species. The number and structure of LL canals is also highly variable [6]. Different
morphologies of the sensory system provide different filter properties. In other
words, morphology determines the range of stimuli to which a sensory system is
most sensitive. The number and placement of SNs as well as number and placement
of canal pores may affect the nature of hydrodynamic information that is received
by the lateral-line system. These variables strongly determine how information from
the water surrounding is transferred to the lateral-line system.
The information from the peripheral LL enters the medulla throuth at least three
pairs of nerves. These are the dorsal and ventral anterior LL nerves (ALLN) which
carry information of neuromasts situated on the head. On the other hand the
posterior LL nerves (PLLN) carry the information of neuromasts situated on the
trunk. Developmental studies on the zebrafish (Danio rerio) and tracing studies in
5

goldfish carassius auratus show that the afferents project to the medulla in a crude
somatotopic manner. The position of the neuromasts along the antero posterior axis
(from head to tail) of the fish is represented in the central projection of the afferents
[12].

2.1.1

Lateral-Line Map

The information about the central physiology of hydrodynamic stimuli in fishes
is limited. Most of the data come from the anatomy and physiology of trout or
goldfish. For this reason a minimal model is needed, in order to better understand
some general principles of information processing in the LL system of fishes.
The brain of vertebrates is composed of two symmetric hemispheres. Two main
structures, that can be distinguished are the rhobencephalon (hindbrain) and the
prosencephalon. The later one is devided in two substructures, which are the diencephalon (middle brain) and the telencephalon (forebrain). The rhobencephalon
is devided in three substrates. This are the myencephalon the metencephalon and
the mesencephalon. LL information is processed at all levels of the brain from the
metencephalon up to telencephalon.
The roots of the LL nerves enter the ipsilateral brainstem and go through the ascending and descending branches. These terminate in the medial octavolateralis nucleus
(MON). The mechanoreceptors of the LL system project by mean of at least three
different nerves in the medial octavolateralis nucleus (MON) in the metencephalon.
Some afferents also terminate in the Eminentia Granularis posterior. The cell of the
MON will project bi-directionally to the lateral portion of the torus semicircularis
and also bi-directionally into the deep layer of the tectum opticum. LL information
will also be processed from the torus and the tectum opticum to higher brain areas
[12].
For fish, the cells in the MON answer only to the LL stimulus. In the torus semicircularis some cells may also respond to an auditory stimulus. In the optic tectum,
the cells are multimodal responding to visual, mechanosensory, auditory and visual stimuli. The projection between torus and optic tectum are topographically
matched. This means that the LL map in the torus and the multi-modal map in
the optic tectum should have an organization compatible with each other [13].

6

Figure 2.4: Schematic view of the projection of the LL in the brain of
teleostean (Picture redrawn from a sketch of Jacob Engelmann). The tectum opticum (top layer) is the first station where all modalities are integrated. The
first and in fish the only center of multimodal integation, where our considerations
stop.

7

The neuronal network for the processing of input stimulus in the fish brain consists,
as mentioned earlier, of two layers:
• MON with nM ON and
• TS with nT S neurons, respectively.
The structure presented in Figure 2.5 is used for a better performance of both an
expansion and a distillation of the input stimulus. Different combinations of neurons
were tried, but different network structures did not give better results.

Figure 2.5: Model of network architecture. Primarily, 100 neuromasts are
connected randomly and sparsly with 3200 neurons in MON. Global inhibition in
the layer provides gain control, enhancing the dynamic range of the sparse activity.
MON projects again randomly and weakly somatotopically onto the map in TS.
Finally. lateral inhibition in TS forms a somatotopic map [11].

8

2.1.2

Hydrodynamic Stimulus

In the first draft of the work a hydrodynamic stimulus was implemented, where the
lateral line system was represented as a one-dimentional arrangement of superficial
neuromasts. Boundary conditions were neglected.

Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of the hydrodynamic stimulus at the lateral
line organ.
The input consists of a moving sphere S and radius r moving parallel to the fish
body at distance D and speed U , which are drawn from independent Gaussian
distributions.

U ∼ N R (µU , σU )

D ∼ N R (µD , σD )

and

(2.1)

We defined (δX, δY ) as the instantaneous direction of motion of the stimulus in
Cartesian coordinates and the velocity potential as:

φ(X, Y, xi , yi ) =

U R3 (xi − X)δX + (yi − Y )δY
q
3 .
2
(x − X)2 + (y − Y )2
i

(2.2)

i

For our case, the velocity parallel to the axis of maximum sensitivity for the cupula
is [11]

9

vφi =

dφ
∂φ dxi
∂φ dyi
∂φ
∂φ
=
+
=
δxi +
δyi
dθi
∂xi dθi ∂yi dθi
∂xi
∂yi

(2.3)

where
∂φ
U R3 [2(xi − X)2 − (yi − Y )2 ]δX + 3(xi − X)(yi − Y )δY
=−
q
5
dθi
2
(x − X)2 + (y − Y )2

(2.4)

U R3 3(xi − X)(yi − Y )δX − [(xi − X)2 − 2(yi − Y )2 ]δY
∂φ
=−
q
5
dθi
2
(x − X)2 + (y − Y )2

(2.5)

i

i

i

i

It is assumed that the activity rate of the ith SN afferent in head-to-tail direction
takes the form [11]:
riLL (X, Y ) = [r0LL + A · vθ (xi , yi , X, Y )]200Hz
+

(2.6)

where r0LL is the instantaneous firing rare and A is a fitted conversion factor. The
LL
= 200Hz
rectification of the firing rates are between 0 and rmax

[r]200Hz
=
+



r


















if 0 ≤ r ≤ 200Hz

0

if r < 0

200Hz

ifr > 200Hz

Different stimuli, water waves and the motion of the fish body itself generate correlated noise in space and time. For this reason an additive Gaussian noise δrill with
standard deviation σnoise is being added to the previous firing rate. Combining the
last one with a correlation length Lnoise and a correlation time τnoise this effect can
be modeled as [11]:
d LL
1
δr (t) = −
δrLL (t) +
dt
τnoise

s

2σnoise
ξ(t)
τnoise

(2.7)

ξ(t) is a vector-valued correlation white-noise process with:

hξ(t)i = 0

hξ(t)ξ T (s)i = Rδ(s − t).

and
10

(2.8)

The nLL × nLL -matrix R describes the spatial correlation between neuromasts [11].
1 xi−xj
Ri,j = exp −
2 Lnoise




2 

(2.9)

Using the hydrodynamic noise, the final expression for the afferent firing rate can
be derived [11].
h

riLL (X, Y ) = r0LL + A · vθ (xi , yi , X, Y ) + δrill

i200Hz
+

The parameters mentioned are being listed in the following Table:

Description
Sphere radius
Length of lateral line
Average
distance
perpendicular to fish
Standard deviation
Average
stimulus
speed parallel to fish
Standard deviation
Conversion
factor
velocity to LL rate
Instantaneous firing
rate
Maximum firing rate
Standard deviation
of noise
Time constant of
noise correlation
Correlation length of
noise
Fish body long axis
Short axis

Parameter
r
L
µD

Value
0.5 cm
4.0 cm
1.5 cm

σD
µU

0.6 cm
5.0 cm/s

σU
A

1cm/s
30000m−

r0LL

40 Hz

LL
rmax
σnoise

200 Hz
10 Hz

τnoise

0.1 s

Lnoise

1.0cm

af ish
bf ish

2 cm
0.3 cm

Table 2.1: TABLE I: Default stimulus parameters.

11

(2.10)

12

