Chapter 5

5.1

Results

The main goal of our analysis is to show that a simple yet biologically plausible
model can give rise to a sharp and somatotopic map in RC. Under the minimal
assumption of feed-forward projections we demonstrate that expansion coding and
sparse coding in LTTD, and recurrent connectivity in RC are necessary and sufficient
features for a successful map formation. To measure the quality of the somatotopic
map as it arises through self-organization, three criteria that we now discuss in turn
are used.
Somatotopic error
The decisive criterion for the success of map formation in our simulations is the
average somatotopic error ∆RC
θ . It quantifies how precisely the distances between
the perpendicular projections of two objects on the animal body are encoded in the
torus and RC population code. This measure is invariant under uniform rotations of
the map, since ∆RC
is based on a synchrony vector [18]. The degree of somatotopy
θ
can be evaluated reliably for almost any tuning curve shape because the estimated
stimulus position is obtained as the angle of the population vector [19]. The main
idea consists in showing that the model can reach nearly optimal somatotopy in RC
through recurrent connections both layers. This result is non-trivial because the
positions and shapes of LTTD tuning curves are highly irregular due to very sparse
afferent connectivity [23].
Efficient coding. Sharpening the tuning curve.
The second criterion for map quality is the average width σw of the tuning curves. It
is shown that tuning curves can be more than two times sharper in the successfully
38

trained lateral-line map in torus than in the sensors [11].The same conclusion have
been attempted for the RC.
The concentration of the broadly distributed afferent activity patterns into sharp
responses without sacrificing somatotopic precision of the population code or its
robustness against noise conclude that the RC can encode stimulus position more
efficiently than the afferents.
Robust coding: Minimizing trial-to-trial variability.
Blurry input and neuronal noise can affect the reliability of a population vector
estimation, especially when spatially correlated [24]. For quick reactions to pray or
predators a low trial-to-trial variability ∆w
noise of the neuronal representation of the
fish and snake body is crucial. It is to be shown that the population vector in torus
and RC is up to two times more stable than in the afferents. The map performance
depends strongly on the distance between stimulus and sensory organ. Stable object
localization is only possible within about one body length.. In our simulations the
w
overall map quality is characterized by the errors ∆w
θ and ∆noise averaged within
one body length L.

The resultst form the model show that strong expansion in the second layer is required in order to keep the somatotopic error low and allow stimulus distillation
to get realized in RC. For 100 receptors in the first layer it is shown that at least
about 1000 neurons in the second layer are needed and about 3000 neurons suffcient
to reach optimal alignment. A large number of neurons does not lead to smaller
errors because the information contained in the noisy responses of a correlated pool
of neurons saturates for large populations [11]. At the same time the projections
have to be sparse. An important prerequisite of the input is to be transformed nonlinearly. Sparse coding as a result of nonlinear filtering through threshold elements
is a common way to decorrelate signals [25].
In conclusion we find in our numerical study that the biologically observed sparse
coding and expansion coding is a requirement for self-organized distillation of the
profoundly blurry input. Additionally, recurrent connectivity with global inhibition
and local excitation is key to successful map formation. The results are compatible
with previous work done by Dr. Julie Goulet in [11].

39

Figure 5.1: Examples of somatotopic error as functions of stimulus distance D.
The somatotopic error σθRC is the deviation of the trained RC map from ideal somatotopy. From the definition of somatotopy it is known:
• σθRC = 0 means perfect somatotopic alignment of the map, whereas for
• σθRC = 1 the map responses are uncorrelated with the actual stimulus position.
In Figure 5.1 an example of different somatotopic error functions for different neuron
numbers in LTTD are given. The curves show the averaged error over different
random initialization of the network run. The shaded areas depict one standard
deviation. The figure illustrates how the error in RC uniformly decreases with
increasing number of neurons in LTTD. Even for large LTTD sizes, however, the
somatotopic error grows quickly with distance for D > L.
In our specific case 3200 neurons in LTTD show nearly an optimal somatotopy in
RC with lateral inhibition.

40

Figure 5.2: Examples of estimated error as functions of stimulus distance D.
The sudden loss of somatotopy in RC for distances greater that the body length
of the snake is due to a fundamental limitation of object localization via the noisy
input [11]. The somatotopic error σθIR in the afferent rates is always zero but because
of decreased localization performance for larger distances D its estimate converges
very slowly with observation period T .
Figure 5.2 shows different estimated error functions dependent on the relative stimulus distance D/L with four different observation periods. The noise amplitude
value is constant at σnoise = 5Hz in each network run. For observstion periods T >
80s a better somatotopic can be seen.

41

Figure 5.3: Average somatotopic error as a function of stimulus distance D .

Overall somatotopy ∆IR
in the RC map decreases monotonically with number of
θ
neurons in LTTD units. As seen in Figure 5.3 at about 3500 MON neurons the error
is very close to its asymptotic minimum. Larger LTTD sizes do not encode better
somatotopy. Error bars depict the deviation over different network connectivities.

42

Figure 5.4: Tuning width ratios as functions of stimulus distance D.
In Figure 5.4 the ratio between the average width σ IR of the tuning curves measured
in the afferents and the average width σ RC in RC measures the sharpening of the
neuronal response through nonlinear filtering in LTTD and RC.
Sharp tuning curves reflect efficient coding. Information about the stimulus position,
which is broadly distributed over the membrane is concentrated in the activity of
a smaller fraction of RC neurons at any given time. In the figure above the tuning
width ratios are represented as functions of stimulus distance D for five different
noise amplitudes σnoise . Smaller noise amplitudes
• σnoise = 1Hz and
• σnoise = 2Hz
allow a better sharpening of the tuning curves.

43

Figure 5.5: Tuning width ratios as functions of stimulus distance D.
For any given stimulus angle, the position estimated by the population vector angle
changes between trials because of noise. The trial-to-trial (estimation) variability
of a neuron layer is given by the standard deviation of the corresponding population vector angle. The average variability ∆w
trial over all stimulus angles measures
IR
the overall robustness of the population vector estimation. The ratio ∆RC
trial /∆trial
quantifies the reduction of sensitivity of PVE to noise.
In Figure 5.5 The decrease in noise sensitivity is very similar for a wide range of noise
amplitudes σnoise . Because of the self-averaging property of the learning process it
is assumed no influence on the final map from the amount of noise during training.

44

