Chapter 2

2.1

The Lateral Line System

The main motivation for the work is the anatomy of the lateral-line (LL) system of
fishes and the assumption of a similarity between the way the LL and the pit organ
in snakes process information.
Simply put, the LL is a sensory system found in aquatic vertebrates such as adult
fish, larval amphibians, and some adult amphibians used to detect movement, vibration, and pressure gradients in the surrounding water[5]. The system provides fish
with spatial perception without using vision and the ability to better navigate in
their environment, helping them to survive in the challenging environment of oceans,
seas, and rivers. In other words, through the lateral line fish feel their aquatic world.
It appears as a faint line of pores throughout the length of the body of fishes and
tadpoles and passes through the vicinity of the gill covers till the base of the tail as
seen in Figure 2.1 (A) [5].
The building blocks of LL are specialized sensory cells called neuromasts and can
be distributed across almost the entire fish body. They consist of up to several
thousand neuromasts distributed over the entire surface of the fish body. To better
understand the functional significance of the LL it is essential to know the physical
properties of the system itself, the anatomical organisation and most important the
neurophysiological principles. The most outstanding characteristic of the LL is the
separation into a population of superficial neuromasts and a population of canal
neuromasts.
• Superficial neuromasts (SN): Placed directly on the surface of the skin,
where they are arranged in lines or clusters on the head, trunk and tail fin.
They play the role of velocity detectors with the result that neuronal responses
are proportional to the velocity of the water flowing around the cupula [6].
3

• Canal neuromasts (CN): Placed in canals on the fish heads and trunk and
the fluid inside the canals contacts the water surrounding the fish through a
series of canal pores. Their main function is to detect pressure gradient and
respond to pressure differences between neighbouring canal pores. Outside the
canal, the pressure gradient is proportional to the acceleration of the water.
Thus, CNs may also be regarded as acceleration detectors of water motions
outside the canal.

Figure 2.1: Lateral line system of a fish. (A) Bodily location of lateral lines. (B)
Longitudinal section of a canal. (C) Superficial neuromast [13].
The neuromasts consists of a macula comprising sensory hair cells, supporting cells
and mantle cells. The ciliary bundles of the hair cells are embedded in a gelatinous
dome-like structure, the cupula as seen in Figure 2.1 (C). The hair cellls, have a
protruding bundle of short stereocilia arranged in astair-case design and a single
kinocilium adjacent to the tallest stereocilium as seen in Figure 2.2. The stereocilia
and kinocilium form synaptic connections with the nervous tissue at the base and
project into a potassium ion rich endolymph. The stereocilia are connected together
by filamentous tip links joining the tip of a lower stereocilia to the side of the
adjacent higher one. These connection points are locations of ion channels that
allows potassium ions of enter the endolymph [13].
When a fish encounters flow relative to it’s surface the surrounding cupula encounters a drag force proportional to the flow velocity and thus deflects in one direction.
4

Figure 2.2: Depolarization of hair cell due to
flow-coupled deflection of
stereocilia [6]
.

Figure 2.3: Superficial and Canal Neuromasts of
the Lateral Line [13].

This stimulus displaces the stereocilia towards the kinocilium and elongates the tip
link. It opens the gate of the ion channel and admitts potassium ions that depolarises the cell. When stereocilia are displaced in the opposite sense, the tension
in the tip link is reduced and the mechanical ion gate is shut, repolarising the cell.
In other words, water movements cause deflections of the cupula resulting in the
shearing of the ciliary bundles, which leads to a change in the hair cells membrane
potential [6].
The anatomy of the LL system varies greatly across different species. For example,
SNs can appear on the skin or recessed in pits with various number and size among
species. The number and structure of LL canals is also highly variable [6]. Different
morphologies of the sensory system provide different filter properties. In other
words, morphology determines the range of stimuli to which a sensory system is
most sensitive. The number and placement of SNs as well as number and placement
of canal pores may affect the nature of hydrodynamic information that is received
by the lateral-line system. These variables strongly determine how information from
the water surrounding is transferred to the lateral-line system.
The information from the peripheral LL enters the medulla throuth at least three
pairs of nerves. These are the dorsal and ventral anterior LL nerves (ALLN) which
carry information of neuromasts situated on the head. On the other hand the
posterior LL nerves (PLLN) carry the information of neuromasts situated on the
trunk. Developmental studies on the zebrafish (Danio rerio) and tracing studies in
5

goldfish carassius auratus show that the afferents project to the medulla in a crude
somatotopic manner. The position of the neuromasts along the antero posterior axis
(from head to tail) of the fish is represented in the central projection of the afferents
[12].

2.1.1

Lateral-Line Map

The information about the central physiology of hydrodynamic stimuli in fishes
is limited. Most of the data come from the anatomy and physiology of trout or
goldfish. For this reason a minimal model is needed, in order to better understand
some general principles of information processing in the LL system of fishes.
The brain of vertebrates is composed of two symmetric hemispheres. Two main
structures, that can be distinguished are the rhobencephalon (hindbrain) and the
prosencephalon. The later one is devided in two substructures, which are the diencephalon (middle brain) and the telencephalon (forebrain). The rhobencephalon
is devided in three substrates. This are the myencephalon the metencephalon and
the mesencephalon. LL information is processed at all levels of the brain from the
metencephalon up to telencephalon.
The roots of the LL nerves enter the ipsilateral brainstem and go through the ascending and descending branches. These terminate in the medial octavolateralis nucleus
(MON). The mechanoreceptors of the LL system project by mean of at least three
different nerves in the medial octavolateralis nucleus (MON) in the metencephalon.
Some afferents also terminate in the Eminentia Granularis posterior. The cell of the
MON will project bi-directionally to the lateral portion of the torus semicircularis
and also bi-directionally into the deep layer of the tectum opticum. LL information
will also be processed from the torus and the tectum opticum to higher brain areas
[12].
For fish, the cells in the MON answer only to the LL stimulus. In the torus semicircularis some cells may also respond to an auditory stimulus. In the optic tectum,
the cells are multimodal responding to visual, mechanosensory, auditory and visual stimuli. The projection between torus and optic tectum are topographically
matched. This means that the LL map in the torus and the multi-modal map in
the optic tectum should have an organization compatible with each other [13].

6

Figure 2.4: Schematic view of the projection of the LL in the brain of
teleostean (Picture redrawn from a sketch of Jacob Engelmann). The tectum opticum (top layer) is the first station where all modalities are integrated. The
first and in fish the only center of multimodal integation, where our considerations
stop.

7

The neuronal network for the processing of input stimulus in the fish brain consists,
as mentioned earlier, of two layers:
• MON with nM ON and
• TS with nT S neurons, respectively.
The structure presented in Figure 2.5 is used for a better performance of both an
expansion and a distillation of the input stimulus. Different combinations of neurons
were tried, but different network structures did not give better results.

Figure 2.5: Model of network architecture. Primarily, 100 neuromasts are
connected randomly and sparsly with 3200 neurons in MON. Global inhibition in
the layer provides gain control, enhancing the dynamic range of the sparse activity.
MON projects again randomly and weakly somatotopically onto the map in TS.
Finally. lateral inhibition in TS forms a somatotopic map [11].

8

2.1.2

Hydrodynamic Stimulus

In the first draft of the work a hydrodynamic stimulus was implemented, where the
lateral line system was represented as a one-dimentional arrangement of superficial
neuromasts. Boundary conditions were neglected.

Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of the hydrodynamic stimulus at the lateral
line organ.
The input consists of a moving sphere S and radius r moving parallel to the fish
body at distance D and speed U , which are drawn from independent Gaussian
distributions.

U ∼ N R (µU , σU )

D ∼ N R (µD , σD )

and

(2.1)

We defined (δX, δY ) as the instantaneous direction of motion of the stimulus in
Cartesian coordinates and the velocity potential as:

φ(X, Y, xi , yi ) =

U R3 (xi − X)δX + (yi − Y )δY
q
3 .
2
(x − X)2 + (y − Y )2
i

(2.2)

i

For our case, the velocity parallel to the axis of maximum sensitivity for the cupula
is [11]

9

vφi =

dφ
∂φ dxi
∂φ dyi
∂φ
∂φ
=
+
=
δxi +
δyi
dθi
∂xi dθi ∂yi dθi
∂xi
∂yi

(2.3)

where
∂φ
U R3 [2(xi − X)2 − (yi − Y )2 ]δX + 3(xi − X)(yi − Y )δY
=−
q
5
dθi
2
(x − X)2 + (y − Y )2

(2.4)

U R3 3(xi − X)(yi − Y )δX − [(xi − X)2 − 2(yi − Y )2 ]δY
∂φ
=−
q
5
dθi
2
(x − X)2 + (y − Y )2

(2.5)

i

i

i

i

It is assumed that the activity rate of the ith SN afferent in head-to-tail direction
takes the form [11]:
riLL (X, Y ) = [r0LL + A · vθ (xi , yi , X, Y )]200Hz
+

(2.6)

where r0LL is the instantaneous firing rare and A is a fitted conversion factor. The
LL
= 200Hz
rectification of the firing rates are between 0 and rmax

[r]200Hz
=
+



r


















if 0 ≤ r ≤ 200Hz

0

if r < 0

200Hz

ifr > 200Hz

Different stimuli, water waves and the motion of the fish body itself generate correlated noise in space and time. For this reason an additive Gaussian noise δrill with
standard deviation σnoise is being added to the previous firing rate. Combining the
last one with a correlation length Lnoise and a correlation time τnoise this effect can
be modeled as [11]:
d LL
1
δr (t) = −
δrLL (t) +
dt
τnoise

s

2σnoise
ξ(t)
τnoise

(2.7)

ξ(t) is a vector-valued correlation white-noise process with:

hξ(t)i = 0

hξ(t)ξ T (s)i = Rδ(s − t).

and
10

(2.8)

The nLL × nLL -matrix R describes the spatial correlation between neuromasts [11].
1 xi−xj
Ri,j = exp −
2 Lnoise




2 

(2.9)

Using the hydrodynamic noise, the final expression for the afferent firing rate can
be derived [11].
h

riLL (X, Y ) = r0LL + A · vθ (xi , yi , X, Y ) + δrill

i200Hz
+

The parameters mentioned are being listed in the following Table:

Description
Sphere radius
Length of lateral line
Average
distance
perpendicular to fish
Standard deviation
Average
stimulus
speed parallel to fish
Standard deviation
Conversion
factor
velocity to LL rate
Instantaneous firing
rate
Maximum firing rate
Standard deviation
of noise
Time constant of
noise correlation
Correlation length of
noise
Fish body long axis
Short axis

Parameter
r
L
µD

Value
0.5 cm
4.0 cm
1.5 cm

σD
µU

0.6 cm
5.0 cm/s

σU
A

1cm/s
30000m−

r0LL

40 Hz

LL
rmax
σnoise

200 Hz
10 Hz

τnoise

0.1 s

Lnoise

1.0cm

af ish
bf ish

2 cm
0.3 cm

Table 2.1: TABLE I: Default stimulus parameters.

11

(2.10)

12

Chapter 4

4.1

Computational model

4.1.1

Simulation Tools

Simulating biological neuronal networks is a core method of research in computational neuroscience. A full specification of such a network model includes a description of the dynamics and state changes of neurons and synapses, as well as the
synaptic connectivity patterns and the initial values of all parameters.
A standard approach in neuronal modeling software is to build network models
based on a library of pre-defined components and mechanisms. The two simulator
tools listed below, propose an alternative approach that allows flexible definition of
models by writing textual descriptions based on mathematical notation.
NEST (Neural Simulation Tool)
NEST is a simulation software for spiking neural network models initially developed
by Markus Diesmann and Marc-Oliver Gewaltig and now developed and maintained
by the NEST Initiative. Mostly used in modeling of information processing, network activity dynamics and development of models of learning and plasticity, NEST
focuses on the dynamics, size and structure of neural systems rather than on the
exact morphology of individual neurons [21].
At first NEST was used to program the individual elements of the project, starting
with the integrate-and-fire neurons and afterwards continuing with the connection
between a small number of test neurons. Working on the STDP-synapse, problems
started not only to slow the progress of the project but also made it impossible to
continue the work with this specific tool. The main issues that we encountered were:
23

• With the existing version of the program it was not possible to give a maximum
and a minimum value for a specific weight function.
• With the version of NEST available at the time, it was not possible to connect
a Spike generator device, in case of a stdp synapse, to a layer of neurons
arranged with periodic boundary conditions i.e a circle of neurons.
Considering this two main issues that occurred during the research phase and after
contacting the developers of NEST it was decided to jump to another simulation
tool.
Brian2 Simulator tool
Brian is a clock driven simulator for spiking neural networks, written in the Python
programming language. It has a powerful, easy to understand syntax that can define,
run and plot neural models in just a few lines of code. Users specify neuron models by
giving their differential equations in standard mathematical form as strings, create
groups of neurons and connect them via synapses. In contrast to the approach taken
by many neural simulators here users select from a predefined set of neuron models
[8]. The main goal of the developers was to create a tool that helps scientist to save
time. It is easy to learn and also easy to use, highly flexible and easily extensible
[22].
Right after starting working with Brian problems were solved and the project continued without other technical obstacles in the way.

24

4.1.2

Leaky integrate-and-fire neuron

A Leaky integrate-and-fire neuron model is being used as a simplified abstract view
of our complex reality. Being one of the most widely used models for analyzing the
behavior of neural systems, it is capable of being analyzed mathematically while at
the same time being sufficiently complex to capture many of the essential features
of neural processing.
Leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) model can be traced back to Louis Lapicque (1907)
long before we understood the electrophysiology of a neuron. It represents the
neuron as a parallel combination of a leaky resistor and a capacitor.

Figure 4.1: The LIF model is a model of a biological neuron used in computational
neuroscience. A neuron is represented by an RC circuit and a threshold. An input
spike modeled as a short current pulse leads to a jump in the membrane voltage
which decays afterwards exponentially. If the threshold is reached an output spike
is emitted and the voltage is reset.

The subthreshold membrane potential dynamics of a LIF neuron is described by
[26]:
Cm

dV
= −gL (V − EL ) + I
dt

25

(4.1)

where Cm is the membrane capacitance, V is the membrane potential, gL is the leak
conductance (the reverse of the leak resistance R), EL is the resting potential, and
I is the external input current. Dividing both sides of the above equation by gL
gives [26]:
I
dV
= −(V − EL ) +
(4.2)
τm
dt
gL
where τm is the membrane time constant and is defined as:
τm = Cm /gL

(4.3)

If I is sufficiently strong such that V reaches a certain threshold value Vth , the
membrane potential is reset to a reset potential Vreset < Vth . The Voltage is clamped
to Vreset for tauref ms, mimicking the refractoriness of the neuron during action
potential. If:
V (tsp ) ≥ Vth : V (t) = Vreset f ort ∈ (tsp , tsp + τref ]

(4.4)

where tsp is the spike time when V(t) just exceedes Vth [26].
This model takes into consideration the fact that a neuron performs a spatial and
also a temporal integration of the synaptic input. It generates a spike when the
voltage reaches a certain threshold and goes in refractory during the action potential.
The LIF model assumes that the spatial and temporal integration of inputs is linear.
Also, membrane potential dynamics close to the spike threshold are much slower in
LIF neurons than in real neurons.
The biggest disadvantage of the Leaky integrate-and-fire neuron is that it does not
contain neuronal adaptation so that it cannot describe an experimentally measured
spike train in response to constant input current. This disadvantage is removed in
generalized integrate-and-fire models that also contain one or several adaptationvariables and are able to predict spike times of cortical neurons under current injection to a high degree of accuracy.
In Brian the LIF model starts by defining a simple neuron model by systems of
differential equations. Each equation is a string with usually one line per equation
formatted with standard mathematical notations and the addition of SI unit of a
specific variable.
The parameters used in the LIF nueron model are listed in Table 4.1.

26

Description
Spike threshold

Parameter
Vth

Value
-54mV

Reset potential

Vreset

-60mV

Resting potential

El

-74mV

Refractory period

τref

2ms

Membrane time constant

τm

10ms

Synaptic time constant

τs

2ms

Table 4.1: TABLE II: Parameters of the LIF neuron model.

4.1.3

Spike-timing dependent plasticity

Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is a temporally asymmetric form of
Hebbian learning induced by tight temporal correlations between the spikes of preand postsynaptic neurons. Synapses in this work follow this exacty modell, meaning
that a connection between two neurons will grow if the post-synaptic neuron fires
soon after the pre-synaptic neuron. On the opposite, a connection will decrease if
the post-synaptic neuron fires before the pre-synaptic neuron [9]. STDP has been
documented at dozens of synapses, in a variety of brain areas and experimental
conditions, both in vitro and in vivo. It is known as a rule for neurons to strengthen
or weaken their connection according to the degree of synchronization of the firing.
The weight change ∆wj of a synapse from a presynaptic neuron i depends on the
relative timing between presynaptic spike arrivals and postsynaptic spikes of the
postsynaptic neurons j. The presynaptic spike arrival times tki , where k = 1, 2, 3.... ,
counts the presynaptic spikes. Similarly, tlj with l = 1, 2, 3, ... labels the firing times
of the postsynaptic neuron. The total weight change ∆wj , which is also known as
the synaptic strength, is induced with pairs of pre- and postsynaptic spikes.

∆wj =

N
X N
X

W (tlj − tki )

(4.5)

k=1 l=1

The function W (x) defines the order of decrease or increase of strength. It depends
on the synchrony of spiking between pre- and post-synaptic neurons, expressed as:

27


A+ exp(− x )

W (x) = 

τ+
x
A− exp( τ− )

if x > 0
otherwise.

(4.6)

A+ and A− are constants defining the amplitude of change in weight at t = 0+ and
t = 0− , respectively. τ+ and τ− are time constants of the exponential decrease in
weight change.
Figure 4.2 represents equation (4.6) of relative weight changes in relation with the
experiments realized by Bi and Poo in [10]. This figure shows typically a decrease in
synaptic weight when the pre-synaptic neuron spikes after the post-synaptic neuron,
and on the opposite an increase in connectivity from pre- to post-synaptic neuron
if the pre-synaptic neuron spikes just before the post-synaptic neuron [9].

Figure 4.2: Spike-Timing Dependent Plasticity (schematic): The STDP function
shows the change of synaptic connections as a function of the relative timing of preand postsynaptic spikes after 60 spike pairings. Schematically redrawn after Bi and
Poo [10]

28

Simulating it directly using this equation though would be very inefficient, because
we would have to sum over all pairs of spikes. That would also be physiologically
unrealistic because the neuron cannot remember all its previous spike times. It
turns out there is a more efficient and physiologically more plausible way to get the
same effect.
In Brian two new variables a+ and a− are defined. These are the traces of pre- and
post-synaptic activity, governed by the differential equations:
τ+

d
a+ = −a+
dt

(4.7)

τ−

d
a− = −a−
dt

(4.8)

When a presynaptic spike occurs, the presynaptic trace is updated and the weight
is modified according to the rule:
a+ → a+ + A+

(4.9)

w → w + A−

(4.10)

a− → a− + A−

(4.11)

w → w + A+

(4.12)

When a postsynaptic spike occurs:

To see that this formulation is equivalent, you just have to check that the equations
sum linearly, and consider two cases: what happens if the presynaptic spike occurs
before the postsynaptic spike, and vice versa.
Now that we have a formulation that relies only on differential equations and spike
events, we can turn that into Brian code. For biological reasons, it is desirable to
keep the synaptic weights in a range wmin < wj < wmax . For the sake of simplicity,
the lower bound is set in most models to zero, wmin =0, so that the weights can’t
get too large or negative.
In the vast majority of synaptic plasticity models, changes in synaptic efficacy are
implemented as a change in synaptic gain, ∆wj , which in effect corresponds to a
postsynaptic locus of expression of synaptic plasticity.

29

Figure 4.3: Implementating spike-timing-dependent plasticity with Brian
The source code shows a complete implementation of a simple network shown on
the right.
In Figure 4.3 a typical and basical implementation of the stdp-synapse in Brian is
shown. Firstly, when defining the synapses a more complicated multi-line string
definition of three synaptic variables is given (w, apre and apost). Although these
variables evolve continuously over time, Brian should only update them at the time
of an event (a spike). The values of apre and apost are not used except at spike
times, and it is more efficient to only update them when needed. In the end the
synaptic weight are being aplied to the target neurons.
Creating a synapses instance does not create synapses, it only specifies their dynamics. Multiple synaptic connections can be created in a single statement (stdp.connect())
and through string expressions a spatial connectivity can be achieved. A StateMonitor object is used to monitor the synaptic variables.
Both excitatory and inhibitory stdp-synapses are being used. Cortical neurons receive balanced excitatory and inhibitory synaptic currents. Adjustments of excitatory synaptic strength are believed to be a major mechanism by which cortical
networks adapt to the statistics of sensory input, over a range of timescales from
seconds to days. While the plasticity of excitatory synaptic connections in the
brain has been widely studied, the plasticity of inhibitory connections is much less
understood.
30

2-Dimensional Expansion.
Neurons are connected by synapses and arranged in a one-dimensional array. Our
goal is to write a string expression that can be used to implement spatial connection
patterns and expand the one-dimensional array into a two-dimensional grid. With
Brian it was possible to modify the implementation of the excitatory and inhibitory
stdp synapse by connecting the neurons in an initialized and predefined grid of x
and y axes.
In the previous version of the simulation tool, spikes were stored as a list of pairs
(i, t). They describe the index and the time of each spike. For the network used,
spikes are stored as two arrays i and t, storing the indices and times. The arrays
can be accessed as attributes of a monitor (SpikeM onitor), which returns both at
the same time.

Figure 4.4: Schematic representation of spatial connection in Brian2.

31

Two sequential stages of the algorithm.
The model used in this thesis for the input to the pit organ was based on work
done previously [11] and is well in accordance with both experimental results and
theoretical consideration.
The algorithm, which is used for the inner brain (MON and Torus) in the LL system
is capable of substantially reducing the mean correlation between responses in torus
to different hydrodynamic stimuli. It is in accordance with the new experimental
results and the anatomical arrangement of MON and TS. The idea is to implement
the same idea and use a two sequential stage algorithm for the input of the pit
membrane in snakes.
• 1. Expansion:
The first part of the network architecture aims to increase the linear separability
of the input by casting it into a high-dimensional space. The first layer, which
consists of the input and the membrane receptors, projected randomly and sparsely
onto the LTTD layer, with the weight wLT T D . This is achived with the excitatory
stdp-synapse between the first layers.
• 2. Stimulus distillation:
As a result of the previous expansion into high dimensions each stimulus yields a
sparse response randomly spread throughout the LTTD, but the LTTD firing rate
patterns for different stimuli are well separated. The linear mapping wRC can be
obtained with a lateral inhibition connection of the LTTD and the RC layer. After
training, the RC response constitutes a relatively sharp and somatotopic mapping
of the stimulus.
Description
Synaptic variable
Synaptic variable
Maximal synaptic weight

Parameter
Apre
Apost
wmax

Value
0.02
-0.021
0.045

Table 4.2: TABLE III: Default network parameters for the stdp-synapse.

32

4.1.4

Measuring map quality

From [11] we define a set of N angles φ = {Φj }N
j=1 and the complex number:
zp (Φ) =

N
X

pj eiϕj

(4.13)

j=1

with pj ≥ 0 and N
j=1 pj = 1. zp is a convex combination of vectors on a unit circle.
Following [18] we can assign to Φ the phase [11]:
P

Izp (Φ)
φp (Φ) = arctan
Rzp (Φ)

!

(4.14)

and variance:
V arp (Φ) ≡ 1 − |zp (Φ)|2 .

(4.15)

Two particular choises for the weights pj are used. The combination with uniform
weights pj = N1 is called the synchrony vector (SV) [11]
zSV (Φ) ≡

N
1 X
eiϕj .
N j=1

(4.16)

φSV (Φ) is the average of the angles in Φ and V arSV (Φ) describes the scatter of the
ϕj around the average.
• V arSV = 1 means that the ϕj are uniformly scattered, whereas
• V arSV = 0 implies that all ϕj are equal up to multiples of 2π.
Given the instantaneous firing rates rw = (rjw )j with [11]:
ri (t) =

Z t
0



h(t, s)g 


X

wi,j rj (s) ds

(4.17)

j

w
and fixed preferred directions (ϕw
j )j of the n neurons in layer w ∈ {IR, LT T D, RC},
the the population vector (PV) is defined [11]:

33

w
n
X

rjw (t) iϕw
e j.
zP V (r ) ≡
P w
r
(t)
k k
j=1
w

(4.18)

The direction φP V (rw ) of the population vector is a biologically plausible way to
decode stimulus direction from a distributed neuronal code [19]. The variance V arP V
quantifies how localized the neural activity is.
Trial-to-trial estimation variability
xslim (t) is defined as the perpendicular projection of the current stimulus position
modeled as a set of receptors distributed on a line segment of length L and oriented
in direction ê. We consider the case for which the projection lies between the head
and the tail of the animal. The true neuronal position 0 ≤ ϑ(t) < 2π of the stimulus
is implicitly defined by [11]:
xslim (t) = x0 +

ϑ(t)
Lê.
2π

(4.19)

Starting with the instantaneous firing rates rw (t) the population vector estimate
ϑˆw (t) of stimulus position can be defined as:
ϑˆw (t) = φP V (rw (t)).

(4.20)

The difference between true and estimated stimulus position is refered to as the
estimation error.
δϑw (t) = ϑˆw (t) − ϑ(t)
(4.21)
Let H be the set of all time points during an observation period T at which the
stimulus is at position (ϑ0 , D0 ) [11]
H(T, ϑ0 , D0 ) = {0 ≤ t ≤ T |ϑ(t) = ϑ0 ∧ D(t) = D0 }.

(4.22)

The expected estimation error or bias of the map in layer w for a given stimulus
position is [11]:
hδϑw i(ϑ0 , D0 ) = lim φSV ({δϑw (t)|t ∈ H(T, ϑ0 , D0 )}).
T →∞

Similarly, the scatter of δϑw around the mean hδϑw i is denoted as:
34

(4.23)

w
(σtrial
)2 (ϑ0 , D0 ) = lim V arSV ({δϑw (t)|t ∈ H(T, ϑ0 , D0 )})
T →∞

(4.24)

w
(ϑ0 , D0 ) is defined as the trial-to-trial variability of the map in layer w at
σtrial
stimulus location (ϑ0 , D0 ). It quantifies how strongly the population vector estimate
is perturbed by noise and changes of stimulus parameters other than it’s location.
To measure the overall reliability of the map for stimuli at distance D0 , we calculate
the average trial-to-trial variability ∆w
trial over all stimulus positions ϑ0 [11]:

2
(∆w
trial ) (D0 ) =

1 Z 2π
w
dϑ0 (σtrial
)2 (ϑ0 , D0 ).
2π 0

(4.25)

Measure of somatotopy.
An important quantity is the relative segregation (ϑ, ϑ0 ) between two directions ϑ
and ϑ0 . A uniform shift of the unit circle does not affect the relative distances in the
map and can easily be adjusted for by multimodal integration and feedback from
the optic Tectum. However, a smaller variance of the estimation bias throughout
the map means better somatotopy [11]. The dispartion σθw of the bias in terms of
the synchrony vector is measured [11]:
(σθw )2 (D0 ) ≡ lim V arSV ({hδθw i(ϑ0 = 2π
T →∞

j
, D0 )}).
N

(4.26)

The synchrony vector is approximated numerically using 100 positions for σθLL and
300 positions for σθT S . We refer to σθw as somatotopic error and denote the average
somatotopic error as ∆w
θ [11]:
1
2
(∆w
θ) =

L

Z L
0

dD0 (σθw )2 (D0 ).

(4.27)

Here we integrate over distances D0 between the input stimulus and the body of the
fish and snake, taking them below one body length L because for larger distances
object localization becomes unstable due to fundamental limitations of the noisy
sensor array [20].

35

Tuning width ratio
Given asymptotic synaptic weights and the stationarity of signal and noise, the
tuning curve hrjw i(θ0 ) is obtained by integrating over a sufficiently long period of
time T [11]:
X
1
rjw (t)
T →∞ |G(T, ϑ0 )|
t∈G(T,ϑ0 )

fjw (ϑ0 ) = hrjw i(ϑ0 ) ≡ lim

(4.28)

with the set of time points:
G(T, ϑ0 ) = {0 ≤ t ≤ T |ϑ(t) = ϑ0 }.

(4.29)

For a given number N of samples from this tuning curve we can construct a population vector zP V (fjw ) with the vector of average rates [11]:


w
fw
j = fj (ϑ0 = 2π

j N
)
N j=1


(4.30)

and the corresponding stimulus positions [11]:


Φ = 2π

j
N

N

.

(4.31)

j=1

w
Using zP V (fw
j ) we can define the tuning curve width σj of the jth neuron in w as:

(σjw )2 ≡ V arP V (fw
j )

(4.32)

and the average width of the tuning curves, i.e., the mean dispersion of the average
firing rates over stimulus positions ϑ0 is:
w

n
1 X
(σjw )2 .
(σ ) ≡ w
n j=1
w 2

(4.33)

The ratio between the average tuning width of the receptors and the map neurons
in torus, σ IR /σ RC , measures the sharpening of tuning curves. Narrower tuning
widths, at the same or better performance, indicate more information per spike and
therefore a more efficient neuronal code [11].

36

37

Chapter 5

5.1

Results

The main goal of our analysis is to show that a simple yet biologically plausible
model can give rise to a sharp and somatotopic map in RC. Under the minimal
assumption of feed-forward projections we demonstrate that expansion coding and
sparse coding in LTTD, and recurrent connectivity in RC are necessary and sufficient
features for a successful map formation. To measure the quality of the somatotopic
map as it arises through self-organization, three criteria that we now discuss in turn
are used.
Somatotopic error
The decisive criterion for the success of map formation in our simulations is the
average somatotopic error ∆RC
θ . It quantifies how precisely the distances between
the perpendicular projections of two objects on the animal body are encoded in the
torus and RC population code. This measure is invariant under uniform rotations of
the map, since ∆RC
is based on a synchrony vector [18]. The degree of somatotopy
θ
can be evaluated reliably for almost any tuning curve shape because the estimated
stimulus position is obtained as the angle of the population vector [19]. The main
idea consists in showing that the model can reach nearly optimal somatotopy in RC
through recurrent connections both layers. This result is non-trivial because the
positions and shapes of LTTD tuning curves are highly irregular due to very sparse
afferent connectivity [23].
Efficient coding. Sharpening the tuning curve.
The second criterion for map quality is the average width σw of the tuning curves. It
is shown that tuning curves can be more than two times sharper in the successfully
38

trained lateral-line map in torus than in the sensors [11].The same conclusion have
been attempted for the RC.
The concentration of the broadly distributed afferent activity patterns into sharp
responses without sacrificing somatotopic precision of the population code or its
robustness against noise conclude that the RC can encode stimulus position more
efficiently than the afferents.
Robust coding: Minimizing trial-to-trial variability.
Blurry input and neuronal noise can affect the reliability of a population vector
estimation, especially when spatially correlated [24]. For quick reactions to pray or
predators a low trial-to-trial variability ∆w
noise of the neuronal representation of the
fish and snake body is crucial. It is to be shown that the population vector in torus
and RC is up to two times more stable than in the afferents. The map performance
depends strongly on the distance between stimulus and sensory organ. Stable object
localization is only possible within about one body length.. In our simulations the
w
overall map quality is characterized by the errors ∆w
θ and ∆noise averaged within
one body length L.

The resultst form the model show that strong expansion in the second layer is required in order to keep the somatotopic error low and allow stimulus distillation
to get realized in RC. For 100 receptors in the first layer it is shown that at least
about 1000 neurons in the second layer are needed and about 3000 neurons suffcient
to reach optimal alignment. A large number of neurons does not lead to smaller
errors because the information contained in the noisy responses of a correlated pool
of neurons saturates for large populations [11]. At the same time the projections
have to be sparse. An important prerequisite of the input is to be transformed nonlinearly. Sparse coding as a result of nonlinear filtering through threshold elements
is a common way to decorrelate signals [25].
In conclusion we find in our numerical study that the biologically observed sparse
coding and expansion coding is a requirement for self-organized distillation of the
profoundly blurry input. Additionally, recurrent connectivity with global inhibition
and local excitation is key to successful map formation. The results are compatible
with previous work done by Dr. Julie Goulet in [11].

39

Figure 5.1: Examples of somatotopic error as functions of stimulus distance D.
The somatotopic error σθRC is the deviation of the trained RC map from ideal somatotopy. From the definition of somatotopy it is known:
• σθRC = 0 means perfect somatotopic alignment of the map, whereas for
• σθRC = 1 the map responses are uncorrelated with the actual stimulus position.
In Figure 5.1 an example of different somatotopic error functions for different neuron
numbers in LTTD are given. The curves show the averaged error over different
random initialization of the network run. The shaded areas depict one standard
deviation. The figure illustrates how the error in RC uniformly decreases with
increasing number of neurons in LTTD. Even for large LTTD sizes, however, the
somatotopic error grows quickly with distance for D > L.
In our specific case 3200 neurons in LTTD show nearly an optimal somatotopy in
RC with lateral inhibition.

40

Figure 5.2: Examples of estimated error as functions of stimulus distance D.
The sudden loss of somatotopy in RC for distances greater that the body length
of the snake is due to a fundamental limitation of object localization via the noisy
input [11]. The somatotopic error σθIR in the afferent rates is always zero but because
of decreased localization performance for larger distances D its estimate converges
very slowly with observation period T .
Figure 5.2 shows different estimated error functions dependent on the relative stimulus distance D/L with four different observation periods. The noise amplitude
value is constant at σnoise = 5Hz in each network run. For observstion periods T >
80s a better somatotopic can be seen.

41

Figure 5.3: Average somatotopic error as a function of stimulus distance D .

Overall somatotopy ∆IR
in the RC map decreases monotonically with number of
θ
neurons in LTTD units. As seen in Figure 5.3 at about 3500 MON neurons the error
is very close to its asymptotic minimum. Larger LTTD sizes do not encode better
somatotopy. Error bars depict the deviation over different network connectivities.

42

Figure 5.4: Tuning width ratios as functions of stimulus distance D.
In Figure 5.4 the ratio between the average width σ IR of the tuning curves measured
in the afferents and the average width σ RC in RC measures the sharpening of the
neuronal response through nonlinear filtering in LTTD and RC.
Sharp tuning curves reflect efficient coding. Information about the stimulus position,
which is broadly distributed over the membrane is concentrated in the activity of
a smaller fraction of RC neurons at any given time. In the figure above the tuning
width ratios are represented as functions of stimulus distance D for five different
noise amplitudes σnoise . Smaller noise amplitudes
• σnoise = 1Hz and
• σnoise = 2Hz
allow a better sharpening of the tuning curves.

43

Figure 5.5: Tuning width ratios as functions of stimulus distance D.
For any given stimulus angle, the position estimated by the population vector angle
changes between trials because of noise. The trial-to-trial (estimation) variability
of a neuron layer is given by the standard deviation of the corresponding population vector angle. The average variability ∆w
trial over all stimulus angles measures
IR
the overall robustness of the population vector estimation. The ratio ∆RC
trial /∆trial
quantifies the reduction of sensitivity of PVE to noise.
In Figure 5.5 The decrease in noise sensitivity is very similar for a wide range of noise
amplitudes σnoise . Because of the self-averaging property of the learning process it
is assumed no influence on the final map from the amount of noise during training.

44

