Chapter 4

4.1

Computational model

4.1.1

Simulation Tools

Simulating biological neuronal networks is a core method of research in computational neuroscience. A full specification of such a network model includes a description of the dynamics and state changes of neurons and synapses, as well as the
synaptic connectivity patterns and the initial values of all parameters.
A standard approach in neuronal modeling software is to build network models
based on a library of pre-defined components and mechanisms. The two simulator
tools listed below, propose an alternative approach that allows flexible definition of
models by writing textual descriptions based on mathematical notation.
NEST (Neural Simulation Tool)
NEST is a simulation software for spiking neural network models initially developed
by Markus Diesmann and Marc-Oliver Gewaltig and now developed and maintained
by the NEST Initiative. Mostly used in modeling of information processing, network activity dynamics and development of models of learning and plasticity, NEST
focuses on the dynamics, size and structure of neural systems rather than on the
exact morphology of individual neurons [21].
At first NEST was used to program the individual elements of the project, starting
with the integrate-and-fire neurons and afterwards continuing with the connection
between a small number of test neurons. Working on the STDP-synapse, problems
started not only to slow the progress of the project but also made it impossible to
continue the work with this specific tool. The main issues that we encountered were:
23

• With the existing version of the program it was not possible to give a maximum
and a minimum value for a specific weight function.
• With the version of NEST available at the time, it was not possible to connect
a Spike generator device, in case of a stdp synapse, to a layer of neurons
arranged with periodic boundary conditions i.e a circle of neurons.
Considering this two main issues that occurred during the research phase and after
contacting the developers of NEST it was decided to jump to another simulation
tool.
Brian2 Simulator tool
Brian is a clock driven simulator for spiking neural networks, written in the Python
programming language. It has a powerful, easy to understand syntax that can define,
run and plot neural models in just a few lines of code. Users specify neuron models by
giving their differential equations in standard mathematical form as strings, create
groups of neurons and connect them via synapses. In contrast to the approach taken
by many neural simulators here users select from a predefined set of neuron models
[8]. The main goal of the developers was to create a tool that helps scientist to save
time. It is easy to learn and also easy to use, highly flexible and easily extensible
[22].
Right after starting working with Brian problems were solved and the project continued without other technical obstacles in the way.

24

4.1.2

Leaky integrate-and-fire neuron

A Leaky integrate-and-fire neuron model is being used as a simplified abstract view
of our complex reality. Being one of the most widely used models for analyzing the
behavior of neural systems, it is capable of being analyzed mathematically while at
the same time being sufficiently complex to capture many of the essential features
of neural processing.
Leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) model can be traced back to Louis Lapicque (1907)
long before we understood the electrophysiology of a neuron. It represents the
neuron as a parallel combination of a leaky resistor and a capacitor.

Figure 4.1: The LIF model is a model of a biological neuron used in computational
neuroscience. A neuron is represented by an RC circuit and a threshold. An input
spike modeled as a short current pulse leads to a jump in the membrane voltage
which decays afterwards exponentially. If the threshold is reached an output spike
is emitted and the voltage is reset.

The subthreshold membrane potential dynamics of a LIF neuron is described by
[26]:
Cm

dV
= −gL (V − EL ) + I
dt

25

(4.1)

where Cm is the membrane capacitance, V is the membrane potential, gL is the leak
conductance (the reverse of the leak resistance R), EL is the resting potential, and
I is the external input current. Dividing both sides of the above equation by gL
gives [26]:
I
dV
= −(V − EL ) +
(4.2)
τm
dt
gL
where τm is the membrane time constant and is defined as:
τm = Cm /gL

(4.3)

If I is sufficiently strong such that V reaches a certain threshold value Vth , the
membrane potential is reset to a reset potential Vreset < Vth . The Voltage is clamped
to Vreset for tauref ms, mimicking the refractoriness of the neuron during action
potential. If:
V (tsp ) ≥ Vth : V (t) = Vreset f ort ∈ (tsp , tsp + τref ]

(4.4)

where tsp is the spike time when V(t) just exceedes Vth [26].
This model takes into consideration the fact that a neuron performs a spatial and
also a temporal integration of the synaptic input. It generates a spike when the
voltage reaches a certain threshold and goes in refractory during the action potential.
The LIF model assumes that the spatial and temporal integration of inputs is linear.
Also, membrane potential dynamics close to the spike threshold are much slower in
LIF neurons than in real neurons.
The biggest disadvantage of the Leaky integrate-and-fire neuron is that it does not
contain neuronal adaptation so that it cannot describe an experimentally measured
spike train in response to constant input current. This disadvantage is removed in
generalized integrate-and-fire models that also contain one or several adaptationvariables and are able to predict spike times of cortical neurons under current injection to a high degree of accuracy.
In Brian the LIF model starts by defining a simple neuron model by systems of
differential equations. Each equation is a string with usually one line per equation
formatted with standard mathematical notations and the addition of SI unit of a
specific variable.
The parameters used in the LIF nueron model are listed in Table 4.1.

26

Description
Spike threshold

Parameter
Vth

Value
-54mV

Reset potential

Vreset

-60mV

Resting potential

El

-74mV

Refractory period

τref

2ms

Membrane time constant

τm

10ms

Synaptic time constant

τs

2ms

Table 4.1: TABLE II: Parameters of the LIF neuron model.

4.1.3

Spike-timing dependent plasticity

Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is a temporally asymmetric form of
Hebbian learning induced by tight temporal correlations between the spikes of preand postsynaptic neurons. Synapses in this work follow this exacty modell, meaning
that a connection between two neurons will grow if the post-synaptic neuron fires
soon after the pre-synaptic neuron. On the opposite, a connection will decrease if
the post-synaptic neuron fires before the pre-synaptic neuron [9]. STDP has been
documented at dozens of synapses, in a variety of brain areas and experimental
conditions, both in vitro and in vivo. It is known as a rule for neurons to strengthen
or weaken their connection according to the degree of synchronization of the firing.
The weight change ∆wj of a synapse from a presynaptic neuron i depends on the
relative timing between presynaptic spike arrivals and postsynaptic spikes of the
postsynaptic neurons j. The presynaptic spike arrival times tki , where k = 1, 2, 3.... ,
counts the presynaptic spikes. Similarly, tlj with l = 1, 2, 3, ... labels the firing times
of the postsynaptic neuron. The total weight change ∆wj , which is also known as
the synaptic strength, is induced with pairs of pre- and postsynaptic spikes.

∆wj =

N
X N
X

W (tlj − tki )

(4.5)

k=1 l=1

The function W (x) defines the order of decrease or increase of strength. It depends
on the synchrony of spiking between pre- and post-synaptic neurons, expressed as:

27


A+ exp(− x )

W (x) = 

τ+
x
A− exp( τ− )

if x > 0
otherwise.

(4.6)

A+ and A− are constants defining the amplitude of change in weight at t = 0+ and
t = 0− , respectively. τ+ and τ− are time constants of the exponential decrease in
weight change.
Figure 4.2 represents equation (4.6) of relative weight changes in relation with the
experiments realized by Bi and Poo in [10]. This figure shows typically a decrease in
synaptic weight when the pre-synaptic neuron spikes after the post-synaptic neuron,
and on the opposite an increase in connectivity from pre- to post-synaptic neuron
if the pre-synaptic neuron spikes just before the post-synaptic neuron [9].

Figure 4.2: Spike-Timing Dependent Plasticity (schematic): The STDP function
shows the change of synaptic connections as a function of the relative timing of preand postsynaptic spikes after 60 spike pairings. Schematically redrawn after Bi and
Poo [10]

28

Simulating it directly using this equation though would be very inefficient, because
we would have to sum over all pairs of spikes. That would also be physiologically
unrealistic because the neuron cannot remember all its previous spike times. It
turns out there is a more efficient and physiologically more plausible way to get the
same effect.
In Brian two new variables a+ and a− are defined. These are the traces of pre- and
post-synaptic activity, governed by the differential equations:
τ+

d
a+ = −a+
dt

(4.7)

τ−

d
a− = −a−
dt

(4.8)

When a presynaptic spike occurs, the presynaptic trace is updated and the weight
is modified according to the rule:
a+ → a+ + A+

(4.9)

w → w + A−

(4.10)

a− → a− + A−

(4.11)

w → w + A+

(4.12)

When a postsynaptic spike occurs:

To see that this formulation is equivalent, you just have to check that the equations
sum linearly, and consider two cases: what happens if the presynaptic spike occurs
before the postsynaptic spike, and vice versa.
Now that we have a formulation that relies only on differential equations and spike
events, we can turn that into Brian code. For biological reasons, it is desirable to
keep the synaptic weights in a range wmin < wj < wmax . For the sake of simplicity,
the lower bound is set in most models to zero, wmin =0, so that the weights can’t
get too large or negative.
In the vast majority of synaptic plasticity models, changes in synaptic efficacy are
implemented as a change in synaptic gain, ∆wj , which in effect corresponds to a
postsynaptic locus of expression of synaptic plasticity.

29

Figure 4.3: Implementating spike-timing-dependent plasticity with Brian
The source code shows a complete implementation of a simple network shown on
the right.
In Figure 4.3 a typical and basical implementation of the stdp-synapse in Brian is
shown. Firstly, when defining the synapses a more complicated multi-line string
definition of three synaptic variables is given (w, apre and apost). Although these
variables evolve continuously over time, Brian should only update them at the time
of an event (a spike). The values of apre and apost are not used except at spike
times, and it is more efficient to only update them when needed. In the end the
synaptic weight are being aplied to the target neurons.
Creating a synapses instance does not create synapses, it only specifies their dynamics. Multiple synaptic connections can be created in a single statement (stdp.connect())
and through string expressions a spatial connectivity can be achieved. A StateMonitor object is used to monitor the synaptic variables.
Both excitatory and inhibitory stdp-synapses are being used. Cortical neurons receive balanced excitatory and inhibitory synaptic currents. Adjustments of excitatory synaptic strength are believed to be a major mechanism by which cortical
networks adapt to the statistics of sensory input, over a range of timescales from
seconds to days. While the plasticity of excitatory synaptic connections in the
brain has been widely studied, the plasticity of inhibitory connections is much less
understood.
30

2-Dimensional Expansion.
Neurons are connected by synapses and arranged in a one-dimensional array. Our
goal is to write a string expression that can be used to implement spatial connection
patterns and expand the one-dimensional array into a two-dimensional grid. With
Brian it was possible to modify the implementation of the excitatory and inhibitory
stdp synapse by connecting the neurons in an initialized and predefined grid of x
and y axes.
In the previous version of the simulation tool, spikes were stored as a list of pairs
(i, t). They describe the index and the time of each spike. For the network used,
spikes are stored as two arrays i and t, storing the indices and times. The arrays
can be accessed as attributes of a monitor (SpikeM onitor), which returns both at
the same time.

Figure 4.4: Schematic representation of spatial connection in Brian2.

31

Two sequential stages of the algorithm.
The model used in this thesis for the input to the pit organ was based on work
done previously [11] and is well in accordance with both experimental results and
theoretical consideration.
The algorithm, which is used for the inner brain (MON and Torus) in the LL system
is capable of substantially reducing the mean correlation between responses in torus
to different hydrodynamic stimuli. It is in accordance with the new experimental
results and the anatomical arrangement of MON and TS. The idea is to implement
the same idea and use a two sequential stage algorithm for the input of the pit
membrane in snakes.
• 1. Expansion:
The first part of the network architecture aims to increase the linear separability
of the input by casting it into a high-dimensional space. The first layer, which
consists of the input and the membrane receptors, projected randomly and sparsely
onto the LTTD layer, with the weight wLT T D . This is achived with the excitatory
stdp-synapse between the first layers.
• 2. Stimulus distillation:
As a result of the previous expansion into high dimensions each stimulus yields a
sparse response randomly spread throughout the LTTD, but the LTTD firing rate
patterns for different stimuli are well separated. The linear mapping wRC can be
obtained with a lateral inhibition connection of the LTTD and the RC layer. After
training, the RC response constitutes a relatively sharp and somatotopic mapping
of the stimulus.
Description
Synaptic variable
Synaptic variable
Maximal synaptic weight

Parameter
Apre
Apost
wmax

Value
0.02
-0.021
0.045

Table 4.2: TABLE III: Default network parameters for the stdp-synapse.

32

4.1.4

Measuring map quality

From [11] we define a set of N angles φ = {Φj }N
j=1 and the complex number:
zp (Φ) =

N
X

pj eiϕj

(4.13)

j=1

with pj ≥ 0 and N
j=1 pj = 1. zp is a convex combination of vectors on a unit circle.
Following [18] we can assign to Φ the phase [11]:
P

Izp (Φ)
φp (Φ) = arctan
Rzp (Φ)

!

(4.14)

and variance:
V arp (Φ) ≡ 1 − |zp (Φ)|2 .

(4.15)

Two particular choises for the weights pj are used. The combination with uniform
weights pj = N1 is called the synchrony vector (SV) [11]
zSV (Φ) ≡

N
1 X
eiϕj .
N j=1

(4.16)

φSV (Φ) is the average of the angles in Φ and V arSV (Φ) describes the scatter of the
ϕj around the average.
• V arSV = 1 means that the ϕj are uniformly scattered, whereas
• V arSV = 0 implies that all ϕj are equal up to multiples of 2π.
Given the instantaneous firing rates rw = (rjw )j with [11]:
ri (t) =

Z t
0



h(t, s)g 


X

wi,j rj (s) ds

(4.17)

j

w
and fixed preferred directions (ϕw
j )j of the n neurons in layer w ∈ {IR, LT T D, RC},
the the population vector (PV) is defined [11]:

33

w
n
X

rjw (t) iϕw
e j.
zP V (r ) ≡
P w
r
(t)
k k
j=1
w

(4.18)

The direction φP V (rw ) of the population vector is a biologically plausible way to
decode stimulus direction from a distributed neuronal code [19]. The variance V arP V
quantifies how localized the neural activity is.
Trial-to-trial estimation variability
xslim (t) is defined as the perpendicular projection of the current stimulus position
modeled as a set of receptors distributed on a line segment of length L and oriented
in direction ê. We consider the case for which the projection lies between the head
and the tail of the animal. The true neuronal position 0 ≤ ϑ(t) < 2π of the stimulus
is implicitly defined by [11]:
xslim (t) = x0 +

ϑ(t)
Lê.
2π

(4.19)

Starting with the instantaneous firing rates rw (t) the population vector estimate
ϑˆw (t) of stimulus position can be defined as:
ϑˆw (t) = φP V (rw (t)).

(4.20)

The difference between true and estimated stimulus position is refered to as the
estimation error.
δϑw (t) = ϑˆw (t) − ϑ(t)
(4.21)
Let H be the set of all time points during an observation period T at which the
stimulus is at position (ϑ0 , D0 ) [11]
H(T, ϑ0 , D0 ) = {0 ≤ t ≤ T |ϑ(t) = ϑ0 ∧ D(t) = D0 }.

(4.22)

The expected estimation error or bias of the map in layer w for a given stimulus
position is [11]:
hδϑw i(ϑ0 , D0 ) = lim φSV ({δϑw (t)|t ∈ H(T, ϑ0 , D0 )}).
T →∞

Similarly, the scatter of δϑw around the mean hδϑw i is denoted as:
34

(4.23)

w
(σtrial
)2 (ϑ0 , D0 ) = lim V arSV ({δϑw (t)|t ∈ H(T, ϑ0 , D0 )})
T →∞

(4.24)

w
(ϑ0 , D0 ) is defined as the trial-to-trial variability of the map in layer w at
σtrial
stimulus location (ϑ0 , D0 ). It quantifies how strongly the population vector estimate
is perturbed by noise and changes of stimulus parameters other than it’s location.
To measure the overall reliability of the map for stimuli at distance D0 , we calculate
the average trial-to-trial variability ∆w
trial over all stimulus positions ϑ0 [11]:

2
(∆w
trial ) (D0 ) =

1 Z 2π
w
dϑ0 (σtrial
)2 (ϑ0 , D0 ).
2π 0

(4.25)

Measure of somatotopy.
An important quantity is the relative segregation (ϑ, ϑ0 ) between two directions ϑ
and ϑ0 . A uniform shift of the unit circle does not affect the relative distances in the
map and can easily be adjusted for by multimodal integration and feedback from
the optic Tectum. However, a smaller variance of the estimation bias throughout
the map means better somatotopy [11]. The dispartion σθw of the bias in terms of
the synchrony vector is measured [11]:
(σθw )2 (D0 ) ≡ lim V arSV ({hδθw i(ϑ0 = 2π
T →∞

j
, D0 )}).
N

(4.26)

The synchrony vector is approximated numerically using 100 positions for σθLL and
300 positions for σθT S . We refer to σθw as somatotopic error and denote the average
somatotopic error as ∆w
θ [11]:
1
2
(∆w
θ) =

L

Z L
0

dD0 (σθw )2 (D0 ).

(4.27)

Here we integrate over distances D0 between the input stimulus and the body of the
fish and snake, taking them below one body length L because for larger distances
object localization becomes unstable due to fundamental limitations of the noisy
sensor array [20].

35

Tuning width ratio
Given asymptotic synaptic weights and the stationarity of signal and noise, the
tuning curve hrjw i(θ0 ) is obtained by integrating over a sufficiently long period of
time T [11]:
X
1
rjw (t)
T →∞ |G(T, ϑ0 )|
t∈G(T,ϑ0 )

fjw (ϑ0 ) = hrjw i(ϑ0 ) ≡ lim

(4.28)

with the set of time points:
G(T, ϑ0 ) = {0 ≤ t ≤ T |ϑ(t) = ϑ0 }.

(4.29)

For a given number N of samples from this tuning curve we can construct a population vector zP V (fjw ) with the vector of average rates [11]:


w
fw
j = fj (ϑ0 = 2π

j N
)
N j=1


(4.30)

and the corresponding stimulus positions [11]:


Φ = 2π

j
N

N

.

(4.31)

j=1

w
Using zP V (fw
j ) we can define the tuning curve width σj of the jth neuron in w as:

(σjw )2 ≡ V arP V (fw
j )

(4.32)

and the average width of the tuning curves, i.e., the mean dispersion of the average
firing rates over stimulus positions ϑ0 is:
w

n
1 X
(σjw )2 .
(σ ) ≡ w
n j=1
w 2

(4.33)

The ratio between the average tuning width of the receptors and the map neurons
in torus, σ IR /σ RC , measures the sharpening of tuning curves. Narrower tuning
widths, at the same or better performance, indicate more information per spike and
therefore a more efficient neuronal code [11].

36

37

